<h1>Circular Economy in Automotive Industry</h1>
Each year 100 bn tons of resource enter the economic system, right from organic materials to metals, minerals, fossil fuels and so on. But only 8.6% of them are getting recycled and our requirement of resource has tripled over half a century and expected to again double within 2060 (expected at 190bn tons). </br> </br>
There are 2 types of economy in existence today. They are linear economy and circular economy. </br> </br>
Linear economy leads to waste of natural resources. Some of these resources are not renewable and those that are, cannot keep up with the rate of human consumption. On the other hand, the circular economy model is a system of production and consumption that aims to reduce waste by innovative design and keeping the product in life cycle by reuse, repair, refurbish or remanufacture and recycle. </br> </br>
The human population is striving hard to balance the nature from extinction in several ways. Adapting circular economy will act as a catalyser for revival of mother nature. </br> </br>
The domestic material consumption per unit GDP is at average of $1.16 per kilogram which is a high cost we are paying as a result of extensive resource utilization. Only 5% of material is captured again into circularity. The mineral extraction over the years to come will create phenomenal degradation to the natural resources for cascading catastrophe. Our current circularity rate is at 9.1% leading to a massive gap & the regeneration rate is at 1.6 earth years. Each year $63 bn worth of e-wastes are generated and only 20% qualifies for circular economy. </br> </br>
Circular economy can offer up to $4.5 trillion economic opportunities by reducing waste, exceling innovation, and through employment. The strategy of circular economy can reduce the greenhouse gas emission by 39% if adoption rate is growing rapidly. </br>
<h2>Why automotive industry needs adoption of circular economy?</h2>
There are approximately 90 million active vehicles around the globe. The average life span of a vehicle is 12-15 years after which they end up in landfill, fully or partially scrapped. Steel, rubber, plastics, and aluminium are four commonly utilized commodities that are found in cars, i.e., from metals to fibres to the sand and quartz, automobile manufacturing uses possibly more raw materials than any other production industry. </br> </br>
Almost 30% of greenhouse gases emission are through fossil fuelled vehicles and 10% of industrial emission resulting in severe climatic condition. Many other health hazard opportunities are also created without notice as they have no or less impact right now. However, this can become a major pull back in future for the efforts of balancing the nature by mankind. Due to this nature as biggest contributor of resource utilization, the automotive industry should take enough proactive measure to preserve the natural resources for benefit of future generation. </br>
<h2>5Rs of automotive industry</h2>
As we understood the circular economy works under five pillars irrespective of which industry or products it is planned for. Below is the illustration on how the 5R’s are connected to automotive industry.
<h3>Reduce:</h3>
The ultimate goal of circular economy is to reduce waste at all aspects wherever possible. The importance of reducing the waste is becoming a vested policy during the design phase itself due to companies wanted to stay ahead on the market competition. </br> </br>
Adoption to green and sustainable material leads to a portion of progress to the stage of innovation which the end users prefer these days as they feel valued towards circular economy contribution and thus extensive critical resource extraction is reduced. </br> </br>
Though not every part of an automobile can become a part of circular economy at least in the near future, only with the need of conscience to preserve the natural resources can pave way to more circular economy practices.
<h3>Reuse:</h3>
Vehicles are now being designed and manufactured for a long-term usage when compared to short span earlier. This is due to the mindset for contributing to preserving the natural resources. </br> </br>
Even when the product has reached the end-of-life condition and no strategy can be employed to extend the usage further, several companies have come up with ideas to dis-integrate the parts that are viable to reuse for other applications. E.g., a motorbike engine which was extensively used and breached the performance benchmark, can be used to power small fisher man boat which uses the power conservatively. These models will leave the products with portion to stay functional and used by other customers whose purpose of reuse is attained.
<h3>Repair:</h3>
The revenue generation dwells most of the time with repairs which is believed to be the better business model in golden era. Companies spend huge investment for the spare parts storage and also leverage the skill sets by employing service campaigns and retail repair shops. </br> </br>
Few modern automotive designs will allow the end consumer to perform any repair operations with simple tools and techniques along with enough guidance through manuals, which keeps the product in life cycle without warranting for reaching out to service centres and also giving privilege to the cost of ownership. </br> </br>
Authorised cheaper bulk quantity OEM parts are incentivised to ensure repair is carried out instead of parts reaching landfill or recycle before end of life.
<h3>Remanufacture:</h3>
The remanufacturing process for automotive is a bit of time consuming and involves much engineering. </br> </br>
This process will help the cost to a retain at minimal for an end consumer when compared to repair with original parts and some time when the spares are not available. However, based on the demand the reman parts are also stocked to ensure consumer can look into this option for quicker resolution. E.g., wire harness parts are mostly reman due to long lead time and very less demand. </br> </br>
Several bulletins and service actions were provided by OEM to approach reman instead of using new parts thus holding a line for need of resource extraction.
<h3>Recycle:</h3>
The last stage of the circular economy is the recycle process. Only when the service life of any product cannot be brought back into the spheres directly are moved to this phase. </br> </br>
Critical and rare earth materials are carefully segregated before the final stage of recycling which creates new raw materials from old with less or full capability on quality. E.g., engine oil (refinement), oil filters (dusting), tyres (rethreading) etc., are few parts that can be recycled with special process and can be given an extra period of life. Most of the non-hazardous materials are incinerated and others end up in landfill.
<h2>To name a few automotive OEM’s who are contributing to Circular Economy</h2>
Though the concept of circular economy is not much adopted in many countries due to many challenges (listed later), here are some of the automotive OEM’s who are already contributing towards greener earth. </br> </br>
<b>BMW</b>: Their concept vehicle “iVision Circular” is completely designed from scratch, which is to be built on 100% recycled material and further aiming for 100% recyclability. All this without compromising the luxury. </br> </br>
<b>Mercedes</b>: The battery vendors of Mercedes have contributed to reduction of 30% of carbon emission during the cell production. Also, one of their plants uses the sustainable energy using photovoltaic cells for running the operations. </br> </br>
<b>Audi</b>: This luxury brand is moving towards remanufacturing program called “Exchange 2.0” which uses digital diagnostic method to analyze & correct the issues instead of replacing with new one. This gives more edge to reduce need of new resource. </br> </br>
<b>Ford</b>: They have restructured their production process to use aluminum alloys (which has good recyclable capability) instead of steel, thus contributing to less need of extracting new resources. </br> </br>
<b>Toyota</b>: They have set the target for reuse/recycle to 85% of their vehicles produced from Jan’15, by setting up authorized dismantling centers across Europe to encourage recycling thus keeping resources in cycle.  </br> </br>
<b>Volkswagen</b>: 100% recycled materials are used in their fabrics, carpets, seats, door trim and decorative inlays for the new vehicles in production and same in pipeline for their subsidiaries. </br> </br>
<b>Honda</b>: One of their motto pillars among “Triple action to Zero”, is to use only sustainable materials by 2050 alongside fueling the vehicle only with clean energy and achieving carbon neutrality. </br> </br>
<b>General Motors</b>: 90% of the production waste (covering solid, liquid, and hazardous materials) will be diverted from landfills to targeted facilities by the year 2025 as per their “Zero Waste” circular economy program.
<h2>Challenges to adopt CE in auto industry</h2>
Every idea and concepts will have their own pros and cons during inception which will be rectified or overcome as time progresses with improvements. Similarly, there are numerous factors that are challenging the industry to bias the circular economy, and some are listed below. </br> </br>
<b>Disrupting Consumer Convenience</b></br>
The tendency of human to adopt to latest product trends keeps the circular economy strategy away from achieving it. Though the product has capability to serve for many years, new products challenge the retention policy of existing, thus creating more room for resource extraction and more waste creation. </br> </br>
<b>Local Regulations & Politics</b></br>
With limitations on local regulations, the OEM ventures into different design and features for various geo locations (forcibly), resulting in development of number of tools, need for research on alternate materials contributing to sustainability which is exhaustive signalling lesser involvement. </br> </br>
<b>Lack of Waste Treatment Infrastructure</b></br>
Due to lack of waste treatment infrastructure vehicle from the past are still have not come into any of the spheres of circular economy. Thus, contributing more towards landfills rather than being recycled to avoid further resource extraction. </br> </br>
<b>Reluctance to Invest</b></br>
The awareness of the need of retaining natural resources have come to limelight only in the recent years. Almost for decade the circular economy models are being in discussion without proper investments either from private investors, the government, or the OEM itself. </br> </br>
<b>Poor Business Model</b></br>
Because of poor business model focussing on only generating revenue, the conscious of upscaling to environmental friendly models are still a long way for OEM. Till date only a few portions of sustainable materials are identified and given a real time purpose which contributes to circular economy. </br> </br>
<b>Lack of Recycling Technology</b></br>
Though numerous technologies on various domains evolve every day, yet the need for building up efficient technology on material recycling is still in prehistoric. The waste components hitting the landfill which are not recyclable is increasing since we are only in research phase on how to disintegrate them to bring it back into the circle. </br> </br>
Many automotive companies are yet to hop into the circular economy bandwagon as we have just begun realising the need of saving the earth’s resources.
</br> </br>
<b>Disclaimer:</b> The views expressed represent my personal opinions and do not necessarily represent the position of my current organization.
