<h1>Role of Metaverse in future Supply Chain </h1>
Today’s technological world has shifted many shapes during the last two decades. Day-to-day new products and services evolve contributing to numerous innovations which has made the mankind to lead a healthy and peaceful life. The internet has taken communication, socializing, knowledge, and so on to a different level of user convenience and experience. The potential use of internet was maxed during the global lockdown caused by COVID-19. Work from home, remote schooling, the hybrid working office model have shown the glimpse of how the future will look like when it comes to individual’s regular activities, jobs and living habits. </br> </br>
Internet data shows that 84% of the world’s population has access to smartphones which is a technology enabler empowered right from the palm. Social and professional networking has created opportunities for huge scale of economies in terms of B2B and B2C customers. Organizations are racing towards adopting technology to stay ahead in terms of innovation & business growth. The recent buzz on the internet is metaverse. So, what is it? </br>
<h2> What is metaverse? </h2>
 Metaverse is basically a connected 3D virtual world focused on socializing. Metaverse is a portmanteau of “meta” & “universe", which means “beyond world” and the name traces its origin to the year 1992 in a science fiction novel called “Snow Crash”. Virtual reality (VR) & augmented reality (AR) are the backbones of creating this immersive experience during inception of this era of revolution, until now and even in future. Avatars are our physical representation in the digital world. Several meetings happen in metaverse as we speak today. </br>
<h2> Why metaverse has gained attention recently? </h2>
The sudden traction is basically due to quicker monetization possibilities using virtual currencies like NFT, cryptocurrencies, web 3.0, etc... Earlier people spent time by creating their desired digital twin of the physical world, including land, marketplaces, fashion stores, and spend time with virtual friends. Few monetized their creative work by selling/exchanging in terms of in-game currency where they can be spent only inside the game. We all know Facebook, one of the technologies and social media giants renamed their brand to “Meta” during Oct’21, which was also fuelling the interest of investors and consumers. </br>
<h2> Framework and technology of metaverse: </h2>
There are seven major components that form the framework of metaverse. Below are the high-level details of it.
1.	Hardware - VR headsets, cell phones, haptic gloves, industrial cameras, projection and tracking systems.
2.	Computing - Computing power, quantum calculation, rendering, data storage, reconciliation, and synchronization. 
3.	Networking - Persistent, real-time decentralized data transmission, the networks, exchange centres.
4.	Platforms - Users and businesses can explore, create, socialize, and participate in a wide variety of experiences.
5.	Tools - The tools, protocols, formats, services, engines, standards for interoperability, and enable the creation.
6.	Payments - Digital payment processes, platforms, fiat to digital currencies cryptocurrencies, bitcoin, and ether. 
7.	Services - Design/creation, sale, re-sale, storage, secure protection, and financial management of digital assets.
Various technologies are required for a metaverse to function and exist. The nine major components that back the technology is augmented reality (AR) & virtual reality (VR), web 3.0, blockchain and cryptography, 3D reconstruction, artificial intelligence (AI), internet of things (IoT), mobile processors, internet (5G/6G). </br> </br>
As said earlier virtual reality and augmented reality are the backbone of Metaverse and to experience the immersive reality, many devices are required. The high-tech devices are still in the early stages; however, they are already performing well to trick the mind of actual experience into the virtual world. Some suits even give the sensation of textures from the virtual world. The market capitalization is expected to grow to 1,500 billion USD by the end of 2030. </br>
<h2> Virtual economy</h2>
Now let us look through the interesting part of how the economies are boosted in metaverse. </br> </br>
Since the days of ransomware attack, the term Bitcoin came into limelight. Bitcoin (virtual digital asset) is a peer-to-peer cryptocurrency used for monetary transactions by eliminating the need of intermediatory financial institutions. A cryptocurrency uses blockchain technology which is a distributed ledger system for carrying out transactions. Crypto technology and blockchain, as such are a big concept to learn. Few terminologies as basics will help us understand the metaverse economy. </br> </br>
<b> Blockchain - </b> It is a distributed ledger that is shared among the nodes of a computer network (peer-to-peer). It stores and processes information electronically in the form of digital ly formatted blocks. Once the block is filled with data, it is chained onto the previous block, which makes the data chained together in chronological order & proof of work claims that it is hard to tamper   with the transaction data (immutable) and hence highly secured. Networks belonging to Bitcoin, Ethereum, Tron, Cardano, and Solana are the major contributors in blockchain technology. </br> </br>
<b> Coin - </b>It is created on its blockchain and acts in much the same way as traditional money. It can be used to store value and exchange between two parties doing business with each other. </br> </br>
<b> Token – </b>It is   like the above-said coin. However, tokens do not have their own blockchain ecosystem, instead it uses any one existing blockchain technology. NFT (non-fungible token) is the key player in metaverse economy. </br> </br>
<b> Smart contracts </b>are simply programs stored on a blockchain that runs when predetermined conditions are met. This technology will help mankind to ease digital shopping experience and payments. This plays a major role in the supply chain. </br> </br>
The creators and collaborators in the virtual world were engaged in digital commerce which created in-game value but could not be monetized in the real world back in 2000’s . This limited the users just to socialize and create avenues for creativity. </br> </br>
Today, the opportunity of monetizing the creators’ efforts is becoming a reality through digital currency like NFT based on the Ethereum platform while possibilities exist to build on another platform too. The underlying cryptocurrency technology of digital assets gives the creator the ownership, security, and value in real time which made metaverse a technology for more people and investors to engage and grow their business. </br> </br>
Below is a simple example of how a business can grow with metaverse. </br> </br>
One of the famous shoe brand “Adidas” had its debut into metaverse NFT through its lifestyle label, “Adidas Originals” during the end of 2021 in the name of “Adidas into the metaverse”. During Nov’21 they purchased 144 land plots in sandbox metaverse (one of the metaverse environment provider) to exhibit the NFT sale. Adidas partnered with Coinbase for crypto payment processing. The NFTs’ were created in collaboration with punk comics, gmoney, and bored ape yacht club. </br> </br>
Ref: https://www.theverge.com/2021/12/17/22843104/adidas-nfts-metaverse-sold-bored-ape   </br> </br>
There were 30,000 NFT collectibles put on sale which were sold under 30 mins of its public launch. 20,000 were offered to Bored Ape or Mutant Ape holders, gmoney and Adidas - Proof of Attendance Protocol holders, 9,620 were sold to others and 380 were held for future events. The company made US$22m from this sale. Also, the sale guaranteed the NFT holders three physical merchandise – a hoodie, a tracksuit, and an orange beanie fashioned like Indigo Herz (the Adidas NFT avatar). This big is the potential which is forecasted for business in future across various industries. </br>
<h2> Metaverse and supply chain </h2>
Now we have a clear understanding of metaverse and its economy. Let us see how supply chain will have an ardent impact with the adoption of metaverse. </br> </br>
Any product that reaches the end consumer will go through several stages to become a sellable unit. On a high level, the stages include sourcing of raw material, manufacturing, distributing the final product to retail store or warehouses in case of online shopping and finally to the end consumer which is called end-to-end supply chain. </br> </br>
The above is the traditional way of carrying a business that has existed for more than two centuries. Now companies want to stay ahead of the competition and prove their products are worth the money by moving the business gradually into the digital stream. Online shopping has peaked over the decade (almost tripled) which has led to the concept of business in metaverse. </br> </br>
Although the metaverse is still largely in its concept stage, we can predict how it can bring enormous benefits to supply chain management. VR, AR, and blockchain technology will transform the traditional way of looking at a supply chain into a pure digital version where most of the grey areas can be improved. Companies who put their reputation first will be able to reduce reputational and business risks by being fully transparent about their supply chain and manufacturing processes. </br> </br>
Some of the business functions are listed below with primary benefits on its own stream </br>
<h2> Manufacturing: </h2>
The metaverse will make the virtual environment accessible to consumers. This will help with the simulation of process changes, design creatively and run scenarios without hindering the physical production at various sites. Even producers can realize a batch size of 1 based on consumers requirement. With IoT, AR, VR, MR, ML, and AI, all stakeholders can get real-time data anywhere in the world and thus, transparency of the materials’ traceability is possible even for the end consumer. </br> </br>
Training employees safely and quickly with the concept of immersive experience, which combines the senses with the presence of VR, spatial engineering, and collaboration will help the learners to quickly understand the concept of manufacturing and their processes. </br> </br>
Digital twin technology powers the metaverse, in which all the real-life scenarios/products/equipment are created digitally and tested for flaws before physical deployment. This way, better products are developed, leading to cost benefits of 30%-40%, which would have been incurred due to quality checks, recalls and so on if not digitally rectified during the design stage itself. </br> </br>
With the help of VR/AR/MR, fixing issues at the site or remotely is possible in the metaverse. Also, collaborative working will help site employees to fix issues or get assistance at site with guidance from someone, anywhere in the world. This potentially saves a lot of money, increase s productivity, and keeps track of all activities carried out. </br>
<h2> Procurement: </h2>
Traditional procurement has been a complex one for many decades and involves a change in strategy often to yield maximum benefits across the supply chain vertical. Regarding settlement between the parties the intermediatory banks takes a bite on the profits. </br> </br>
Smart contracts and, digital procurement, bidding wars for artifacts will increase the contract and obligations of the sellers and buyers. Metaverse creates end-to-end transparency in collaboration with every layer of the supply chain, which the consumers, investors prefer these days. This creates room for agility and potential increase in market share. </br> </br>
Smart contracts are blockchain computer programs with pre-defined rules tailor-made for each business and stakeholders. When the event code in the smart contract is triggered by the parties involved in the chain, the contract is executed and verified in the blockchain, and settlement is done through digital currency instantly. </br> </br>
Buyers spend a lot of time identifying the efficient supplier for the business need and sometimes huge money is spent on traveling. In metaverse, the buyer can travel anywhere without physical travel and engage in vendor sourcing, price negotiation, and contract management. The future state of digital procurement will be in metaverse, where the supplier will have virtual billboards and stall exhibits to showcase their products and ability to venture into new business  </br> </br>
Demand estimation will become easy with AI programmed in metaverse which helps in critical planning well ahead of time. With all parties involved throughout the supply chain, determining quality standards and technical specifications, and acquiring goods and services will be validated without counterfeiting due to blockchain integration in metaverse. This ensures there is a smooth supply chain effectively and efficiently. </br>
<h2> Product lifecycle management: </h2>
At the most fundamental level, product lifecycle management (PLM) is the strategic process of managing the complete journey of a product from initial ideation, development, service, and disposal. One of the major challenges in PLM is most of the business es operate in the systems between functions which can be overcome in metaverse. With more people engagement and understanding customer behaviour in real-time by collaborating on design and requirement ideas, the products can have a shorter life cycle. This creates avenues for new product development and makes it easy to market. Any product and service in existence right from paper clip to rocket must go through five phases of PLM as listed below, along with metaverse benefits. </br> </br>
1.	<b> Plan: </b>The sharing of ideas and fundraising becomes easy in metaverse due to the collaborative experience. Investors can seamlessly initiate payments through cryptocurrency. Recording the idea in blockchain will also help to file patent s easily in the future </br> </br>
2.	<b> Design: </b>Once the ideas are realized, the design phase kicks in. With the help of metaverse, it is easy for various stakeholders to collaborate on the requirements. Tweaking instantly without any wait time and quick management approvals will increase productivity and faster time to market </br> </br>
3.	<b> Build: </b>With IoT and digital twin technology in metaverse, products can be easily produced with fewer quality issues, machine break downtime, supply chain issues and other cost-incurring events since the technology alert us ahead of time </br> </br>
4.	<b> Assist: </b>Virtual assistance in metaverse will enable a sign of trust for consumers since they are programmed to attend to every consumer in one-on-one conversations and quicker resolution for service and support. This could also boost the sales </br> </br>
5.	<b> Retire: </b>With AI & ML integrated in the metaverse, the data required for the future products are made handy when the existing model needs to be phased  </br>
<h2> Logistics: </h2>
One major spending in a product before reaching a customer is on logistics. Due to the complex process, huge amount is being spent on this stage. </br> </br>
A recent trend in consumer behaviour is they demand more visibility on the information of where the parts are coming from. Having such transparent information public will attract more investors bringing more confidence on the company. Blockchain and IoT will enable this function to work smoothly. Distributed and decentralized ledgers reduce bottlenecks and clerical errors, as well. </br> </br>
Using smart contracts, retailers no longer need brokerages, lawyers or other third parties to complete tasks. Smart contracts enable retailers and logistics companies to enter binding agreements that will immediately dissolve if all agreed-upon stipulations aren't met. These ledger-based contracts increase transparency and profits while decreasing delivery time and costly errors. </br> </br>
Since all the documents like certificate of origin, harmonized system code, invoice, quality check validation, and so on are available digitally across the distributed ledger, access to these is available for anyone who has been a partner in the network. </br>
<h2> Connecting physical world & metaverse (physical + digital) phygital business) </h2>
Though few companies are into virtual sales already, many remain mute on how to achieve the physical sale of the digital. D-Commerce is the new business model, which connects the shopping experience from the virtual to the real world and vice versa. </br> </br>
One of the concepts proposed by Boson Protocol helps the Phygital business. Boson can be conceived as a commerce bridge between the metaverse and the physical universe, enabling smart contracts to connect to real-world commerce using a decentralized commerce infrastructure everyone can trust, and use.  Boson automates digital to physical redemptions by tokenizing a buyer and seller’s commitment to exchange digital value for a real-world thing later.  Commitments are made by depositing digital value into an escrow contract within a stateful non-fungible commitment token. This is achieved with the help of thing token built on a standard ERC-20 architecture, which can be bought/sold/traded in any exchanges hosting the wallet feature. </br>
<h2> Finally, are we there yet? </h2>
The evolution of mankind took several hundred years, however, the metaverse transformation is expected to happen within a decade, given the hunger for technology across all age groups. Regulatory conditions are yet to be created and tested; adoption is still at the initial stages. </br> </br>
It took twenty years & US$10b US To build James Webb Space Telescope to trace our past origin, but we need just millions to design our efficient way of the future supply chain.</br> </br>
<b>Disclaimer:</b> The views expressed represent my personal opinions and do not necessarily represent the position of my current organization.
